[1]              
In my reasons for decision released May 13,
2024,[1]
I dismissed the motion brought by Mr. Gregory John Monforton, the former lawyer
for the plaintiffs, as proposed intervenor seeking an order for leave under rule
13.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure[2]
to intervene as an added party to what counsel in this proceeding have called the
“Settlement Interpretation Motion.”[3]
[2]              
In para. 132 of my Ruling on Intervention
Motion, I fixed a schedule for delivery of the parties’ costs submissions
in the event that they were unable to agree on the question of the costs of the
motion.
[3]              
The parties have been unable to agree on costs.
[4]              
The defendants Canadian Pacific Railway Company,
James Hamilton, and Christopher McMillan (collectively, “CP Rail”),[4] the defendant Andrew
Williams (“Andrew”), the defendant Corporation of the Town of Lakeshore (“Lakeshore”),
and the proposed intervenor have all delivered their various submissions in
accordance with the prescribed schedule.[5]
[5]              
I have read and considered all the submissions, costs
outlines, and other materials received.
[6]              
The position of CP Rail is that it is entitled
to its costs of the motion on a partial indemnity basis in the total amount of
$65,353.64, comprised of $55,701.60 of fees, $2,133.48 of taxable
disbursements, and $7,518.56 of HST.
[7]              
Andrew claims his partial indemnity costs in the
total amount of $16,276.61, comprised of $14,404.08 of fees and $1,872.53 of
HST.
[8]              
Lakeshore requests payment of its partial
indemnity costs in the total amount of $20,110.95, inclusive of disbursements
and HST.
[9]              
Finally, the position of the proposed intervenor
is that the responding parties’ costs of the motion be fixed in the total
amount of $15,000, to be split between the three responding parties or, in the
alternative, costs to each responding party should be fixed in the all-inclusive
amount of $7,500.
[10]          
In Ontario, cost awards in civil law matters are
governed by s. 131 of the Courts of Justice Act[6] and, in most cases, rule
57.01 of the Rules of Civil Procedure.
[11]          
Subsection 131(1) of the Courts of Justice
Act confers upon the court a general discretion to determine costs, in the
following terms:
[12]          
It has been said that making an award of costs
is inherently an exercise of judicial discretion. Indeed, the Supreme Court of
Canada and our Court of Appeal have held that, “costs awards are ‘quintessentially
discretionary.’”[7]
[13]          
That said, the discretion conferred by s. 131(1)
of the Courts of Justice Act is expressly made subject to the “rules of
court.” Rule 57 of the Rules of Civil Procedure deals with the awarding
and fixing of costs in civil proceedings and provides guidance in the exercise
of the court’s discretion by enumerating circumstances and factors that the
court may consider when determining costs. In this regard, subrule 57.01(1)
provides that:
[14]          
The indemnification of the successful party is a
paramount objective – but not the only one – to be served by a costs order.[8] Our Court of Appeal has
recognized that: “[m]odern costs rules are designed to foster three fundamental
purposes: (1) to partially indemnify successful litigants for the cost of
litigation; (2) to encourage settlement; and (3) to discourage and sanction
inappropriate behaviour by litigants.”[9]
[15]          
In DUCA Financial Services Credit Union Ltd.
v. Bozzo, Cumming J. described the “normative approach” to costs awards in
Ontario as follows:
[16]          
The Ontario Court of Appeal has observed that “partial
indemnity costs are ordinarily calculated using an hourly billing rate that is
around 60 percent of counsel’s actual rate,” which “must generally be adjusted
further to take into account the factors in r. 57.01(1) of the Rules.”[11]
[17]          
In fixing the amount of costs to be awarded, the
court’s objective is not to reimburse a litigant for every dollar spent on
legal fees. “The fixing of costs is not a bookkeeping exercise.”[12] Rather, in exercising
its discretion, a court must produce a result that is fair and reasonable in
all the circumstances.[13]
The “overriding principle is reasonableness.”[14]
[18]          
As the Ontario Court of Appeal observed in its
leading decision in Boucher v. Public Accountants Council (Ontario): “[o]verall,
as this court has said, the objective is to fix an amount that is fair and
reasonable for the unsuccessful party to pay in the particular proceeding,
rather than an amount fixed by the actual costs incurred by the successful
litigant.”[15]
[19]          
The court should also consider the totality of
the costs award to ensure that it is not disproportionate to the amount
recovered.[16]
That is consistent with the directive of subrule 1.04(1.1) of the Rules of
Civil Procedure that in applying the rules, “the court shall make orders
and give directions that are proportionate to the importance and complexity of
the issues, and to the amount involved, in the proceeding.” That said, while
the consideration of proportionality “is necessary to the soundness of any
costs award and to ensure the health of the justice system,” the overarching principle
remains that the order for costs must be fair and reasonable.[17]
[20]          
I am guided by these governing principles here.
[21]          
As I have reviewed above, the indemnification of
the successful party is a paramount objective in making costs awards, and the “normative
approach” in Ontario is that costs should follow the event.
[22]          
There is no reason to depart from the
presumptive rule here. The responding and opposing parties, that is, CP Rail,
Andrew, and Lakeshore, were entirely successful in having the intervention
motion dismissed and are entitled to their costs. In fairness, the proposed
intervenor does not contest their entitlement to costs.
[23]          
As reflected in their respective cost
submissions, all parties are agreed that the appropriate scale here is the
partial indemnity scale.
[24]          
At the outset of my analysis, I should say that
I have considered all of the factors enumerated in subrule 57.01(1) of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, not all of which are equally relevant in the instant
circumstances (or at all). As such, I do not propose to specifically address
each of the factors below.
[25]          
I note that there was no specific objection
raised in the responding cost submissions of the proposed intervenor to the
amounts claimed by the respective parties for disbursements. I have reviewed
the items claimed as disbursements by CP Rail ($2,133.48) and by Lakeshore
($1,379.17), and I note that the amounts in question were incurred for items
like transcript charges, courier costs, travelling expenses for the appearance
in Windsor, etc. I am satisfied that the amounts claimed are reasonable, appropriate,
and recoverable.
[26]          
Similarly, there was no specific objection
raised by the proposed intervenor to the hourly rates charged by counsel for
Andrew[18]
or Lakeshore.[19]
[27]          
Paragraph 8 of the Proposed Intervenor’s
Submissions does object to the “$955-$660 per hour” rates claimed by counsel
for CP Rail; however, those rates reflect the actual hourly rates of the
various lawyers engaged by CP Rail, and CP Rail’s claim is not based on its
lawyers’ actual hourly rates. CP Rail’s claim is for indemnification of its
lawyers’ partial indemnity rates. Most of the work that is the subject-matter
of CP Rail’s claim for costs was performed by Mr. Christopher J. Rae, and the
actual claim of CP Rail is based on Mr. Rae’s partial indemnity rates of $396
(for work performed in 2022) and $450 (for work performed in 2023). In the
circumstances, given the experience of Mr. Rae, and the importance of the
issues involved, I am satisfied that the partial indemnity rates claimed by CP
Rail are fair and reasonable.
[28]          
In sum, subject to one related concern, which I address
below, I am satisfied that all hourly rates claimed by counsel for the
responding parties are fair and reasonable.
[29]          
As referenced, the fundamental position of the
proposed intervenor is that the responding parties’ costs of the motion be
fixed in the total amount of $15,000, to be split between the three responding
parties. In other words, Mr. Monforton argues that he should be made to pay for
only one set of costs.
[30]          
The sole authority that Mr. Monforton cites in
support of this rather remarkable position is the decision of then R.S.J.
Hackland in Guergis v. Novak.[20]
However, respectfully, that decision does not assist the proposed intervenor.
In Guergis v. Novak, several defendants moved to strike out the claims
of the plaintiff politician. The defendants were successful on what was
essentially a pleadings motion (no evidence, no cross-examinations, just the
statement of claim). There were five sets of moving party defendants. In short,
the court held that two of the defendant groups with “identical” interests were
awarded one set of costs, while other groups with varying interests were
awarded separate amounts. R.S.J. Hackland held that:
[31]          
In the result, R.S.J. Hackland awarded,
collectively, almost $120,000 to the various defendants on the pleadings
motion. To be clear, R.S.J. Hackland awarded four sets of defendants their own
separate costs on that pleadings motion, allowing fees to each set of
defendants in amounts ranging from $18,000 to $40,000. In that regard, it may
be said that Guergis v. Novak actually stands for the proposition that,
even on a simple pleadings motion, multiple defendants who do not share
identical interests may each recover their own separate set of costs.
[32]          
As such, on the whole, I do not think that Guergis
v. Novak is of much assistance to the proposed intervenor here and, even at
its highest, its most favourable aspects are distinguishable from the
circumstances of the instant case.
[33]          
In the instant case, the relief sought by the
proposed intervenor on the intervention motion, if granted, would have had an
impact on all of the responding parties. The decision of CP Rail, Andrew, and
Lakeshore to retain their own legal counsel is beyond question. Each defendant
incurred their own costs responding to and opposing the motion brought by the
proposed intervenor, which I dismissed. As in Guergis v. Novak, when the
plaintiffs here chose to sue a wide variety of defendants on the basis of wide-ranging
accusations, the expectation of those plaintiffs must be that such claims will
be vigorously defended and those defendants with different interests will be
separately represented and those with similar interests may or may not be
separately represented.[22]
In any event, the plaintiffs’ expectation here must have been that the
defendants would be incurring substantial costs in the defence of this action.
[34]          
Further, it cannot be said that three sets of responding
parties have “identical” interests in the proceeding. When one reviews the
plaintiffs’ statement of claim, it is quite clear that there are very different
claims being advanced against each of CP Rail, Andrew, and Lakeshore. They do
not have identical interests. CP Rail and Andrew were both directly involved in
the collision, Lakeshore was not. CP Rail was responsible for the operation of
the freight train. Andrew was responsible for the operation of his motor
vehicle. The claims against CP Rail are focussed on the operation of the train.
Lakeshore had nothing to do with that. The claims against Lakeshore have to do
with what might generally be called “road conditions.” CP Rail and Andrew had
nothing to do with that.
[35]          
Indeed, Andrew is particularly different from
the other responding parties in that he is actually a plaintiff in his own
right in a companion action, in which he is also suing CP Rail and Lakeshore. And
on the instant intervention motion, Andrew was privy to certain information covered
by settlement privilege and solicitor-client privilege, to which both CP Rail
and Lakeshore had no access.
[36]          
Moreover, as Mr. Thompson for Lakeshore points
out, at no point in any one of the multiple case conferences that were held in
advance of the intervention motion did counsel for the proposed intervenor ever
raise the issue that the parties were not entitled to present their positions
independently.[23]
In the same vein, Mr. Rae observes that no direction was sought by Mr.
Monforton or made by this court in advance of the motion being briefed that one
or more of the responding parties ought to have filed a joint factum.[24]
[37]          
In sum, in the instant case it simply cannot be
said that any of CP Rail, Andrew, or Lakeshore have “identical” interests, as
did two – and only two – of the defendant groups in Guergis v. Novak. In
my view, each of those three sets of responding parties are entitled to their
own legal costs of the motion. And the proposed intervenor ought to have
expected that (if, in fact, he did not). Indeed, I note the submission made by
Mr. Rae on behalf of CP Rail that, “Mr. Monforton was advised from the outset
that his attempt to intervene and derail the preliminary trial motions would be
vigorously opposed.”[25]
[38]          
In his submissions, counsel for the proposed
intervenor attempted to downplay the significance of “what amounts to a
procedural motion.”[26]
Respectfully, I disagree. This was not a straightforward procedural motion. To
understand the issues on the intervention motion, one had to possess a full
command of the issues involved in the Settlement Interpretation Motion. Unlike
the simple pleading motion in Guergis v. Novak, where the court awarded almost
$120,000 in costs to the various defendants, the moving party proposed
intervenor delivered an affidavit in support of his motion, and there was
cross-examination on that affidavit. The transcript of the cross-examination of
Mr. Monforton was 138 pages.[27]
There were at least three to four case conferences held in advance in
connection with the intervention motion and the other related pretrial motions.
The competing arguments required a full day of the court’s time on a special appointment
in order for the positions of all parties to be fully canvassed.[28]
[39]          
In terms of legal complexity, I agree with Mr.
Rae that this was a reasonably complex motion involving the application of principles
regarding motions for leave to intervene as a party in the relatively rare context
of a preliminary pretrial motion.[29]
In addition, the proposed intervenor alleged a waiver of solicitor-client and
settlement privilege, which added to the complexity of the proceeding. The
proposed intervenor also couched his purported contribution on both hearsay and
subjective intention evidence, which raised issues of admissibility and further
complicated the matters in issue.
[40]          
I also agree that the issue on the intervention
motion and its practical impact on the litigation was of critical importance to
each of the responding parties. To highlight just one aspect of the importance
to the responding parties, in para. 125 of my Ruling on Intervention Motion,
I expressly found that “the responding/opposing parties would suffer undue
delay and prejudice if the proposed intervention of Mr. Monforton were
permitted.” I explained that:
[41]          
In that context, I wholly understand Mr. Rae’s
pointed submission that:
[42]          
I have also considered the reasonable
expectations of the unsuccessful party. Mr. Monforton’s intervention motion was
brought in the face of a body of jurisprudence in which, as I observed, “the
courts have repeatedly held that leave to intervene in a private lawsuit should
be granted in ‘rare’ cases only.”[32]
[43]          
As such, I agree with the submission of Ms.
Davenport on behalf of Andrew that, echoing a similar submission expressed by
Mr. Rae, when Mr. Monforton brought his intervention motion, “he knew or ought
to have known that he would face costs exposure if he was successful.”[33]
[44]          
On behalf of the proposed intervenor, Mr. Van
Bakel delivered a costs outline, which indicates that if the proposed
intervenor had been successful, Mr. Van Bakel would have claimed costs of the
motion in the approximate amount of $18,721.94. As Ms. Davenport has noted,
while that claim was not supported by the production of any dockets detailing
the time spent or amounts charged to the client in relation to the intervention
motion,[34]
I note that the $18,721.94 amount that Mr. Van Bakel would have claimed is
roughly comparable to the $16,276.61 amount claimed by Ms. Davenport on behalf
of Andrew and the $20,110.95 amount claimed by Mr. Thompson on behalf of Lakeshore.
In the circumstances, I do not think that the proposed intervenor is in a
position to claim that the amounts requested by either Andrew or Lakeshore are unfair,
unreasonable, excessive, or imprudent.
[45]          
Counsel for the proposed intervenor argues that
there was duplication of effort as between the three sets of lawyers for the
responding parties. Respectfully, I disagree. To my mind, to the extent that
there was some duplication as between the three responding parties in their
written and oral submissions, it was minimal and unavoidable in the
circumstances. The intervention motion was one of multiple pretrial motions
argued before me over a three-day special appointment hearing. My recollection
over that three-day hearing is that all counsel, consistent with their
considerable courtroom experience, made a concerted effort to minimize any
duplication in their submissions.
[46]          
In particular, on the intervention motion, Ms.
Davenport, for example, addressed certain aspects of the sub-issues relative to
settlement privilege.[35]
That is not surprising given that, among the responding parties, only her
client was a legitimate claimant of settlement privilege because CP Rail and
Lakeshore were not parties to the settlement of the plaintiffs’ claims against
Andrew.
[47]          
Similarly, Mr. Rae on behalf of CP Rail
addressed certain legal issues that were not addressed or not fully explored by
counsel for the other responding parties.[36]
For example, Mr. Rae addressed in some detail why Mr. Monforton’s proposed
evidence would amount to no more than subjective intention evidence, a point
which I accepted in my Ruling on Intervention Motion.[37]
[48]          
And it was Mr. Thompson on behalf of Lakeshore
who, among other submissions, made the point that if Mr. Monforton did indeed
have relevant (non-privileged) information to share with the court on the
Settlement Interpretation Motion, the provisions of subrule 39.03(4) of the Rules
of Civil Procedure, which provide that a witness may be examined at the
hearing of a motion, remain available to the parties on the intervention motion
– a point that I expressly noted in my decision on the intervention motion.[38]
[49]          
In short, in my view, each of the three lawyers
for the different responding parties advanced differentiated submissions on
behalf of their respective clients and brought a distinct view to the issues
involved in the hearing of the intervention motion. To the extent that there
was some minimal and unavoidable repetition of points, it certainly was not to
such an extent that should disentitle or otherwise prejudice those responding
parties to their separate claims for costs.
[50]          
Having said all of that, I am concerned about
one area of apparent duplication of work, being the amount claimed by CP Rail
for the preparation of its factum on the intervention motion. In that regard, I
note the following:
[51]          
I am acutely aware of the fact that it is not
for me to tell any law firm how to staff their files. It goes without saying
that they are at liberty to assign their legal professionals as they think fit.
If they believe it is appropriate to parachute in a senior research lawyer to head
up or play a major role in the preparation of a factum on an important
intervention motion, that is for the law firm to decide. That is an issue as
between the law firm and its client, and not for the court.
[52]          
That said, it is a wholly separate question as
to whether the unsuccessful party on an intervention motion should be made to
financially account for all of that same law firm’s decisions as to how they
staff their files. Just because a law firm or lawyer and their client agree that
a certain service is necessary does not mean that the opposing party should be
held to pay for it.
[53]          
At the end of the day, the question for the
court is what is fair, reasonable, and proportionate in terms of a cost award.
On the material before me, I am not satisfied that CP Rail’s claim for 73.3
hours (or $31,982.70) for the preparation of a factum is justifiable in all of
the circumstances, particularly when counsel for the other opposing parties
claimed just 16 hours and 17.4 hours for the preparation of their client’s
respective factum.
[54]          
For all of these reasons, in all of the
circumstances of the instant case, I find that CP Rail’s claim for 73.3 hours
(or $31,982.70) in connection with the preparation of its factum represents
time spent that is “so grossly excessive as to be obvious overkill.”[41]
[55]          
Even if I were to back out the monetary value of
all of Mr. Roddey’s logged work, that would still leave the CP Rail claiming $10,000
or 36.4 hours of work on the preparation of their factum when, again, counsel
for Andrew spent just 16 hours and counsel for Lakeshore spent 17.4 hours. In
other words, even backing out all of Mr. Roddey’s 36.4 hours, the claim of CP
Rail for preparation of its factum still represents more than the total hours
claimed by both of its co-counsel on behalf of the other two responding parties
combined.
[56]          
Having considered, inter alia, the
submissions of all of the parties, the relevant factors enumerated in subrule
57.01(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, and the principles that should
guide the court’s exercise of its discretion under s. 131 of the Courts of
Justice Act to award costs, I find that:
[57]          
Therefore, there shall be an order that the proposed
intervenor shall pay the costs of its failed intervention motion to the
opposing parties within 30 days, fixed in the all-inclusive amount of $40,553.48
payable to CP Rail, in the all-inclusive amount of $16,276.61 payable to
Andrew, and in the all-inclusive amount of $20,110.95 payable to Lakeshore.