[1]              
In this application, the applicant seeks to vary
an interim child support order that was made 20 years ago, so as to terminate
his support obligations toward the three children of the relationship.  He also
seeks reimbursement for child support that he paid after the dates that he
alleges the children became disentitled to support.
[2]              
The respondent resists the application, and
claims an increase in child support, retroactive to November 1, 2019.
[3]              
The parties began living together in 1994. 
There were three children born of the relationship, Alyssa, born April 17,
1995, Celisha, born September 6, 1997, and Breanna, born December 19, 2001. 
The parties separated for the first time in 2005.  In that year, the respondent
commenced proceedings in the Superior Court of Justice in Orangeville.  She was
named as the applicant in that proceeding but, in order to avoid confusion, I
will continue to refer to her as the respondent and to Esa Hosein as the
applicant.  An interim order was made by Kruzick J. dated December 12, 2005,
which granted primary care of the children to the respondent, access to the
applicant, and ordered him to pay child support of $698 per month for the three
children, based on attributed income of $37,000 per year.  He was also ordered
to pay $110 per month, representing ½ of the daycare expense, for a total
monthly amount of $808.
[4]              
The parties attempted reconciliation several
times over the ensuing 5 years, but separated permanently in 2010.  The
application commenced by the respondent became dormant.  The interim support
order remained in place, and the applicant continued to pay $808 per month in
the years thereafter.  To his credit, he made his payments reliably.  To his
discredit, however, those payments were far below the amount he should have
been paying, given the increases in his income over the years.
[5]              
As noted above, the interim support order was
based on the applicant having attributed income of $37,000 per year.  The
income tax records filed at this trial, and in particular the comparative tax
summaries, reveal that his total annual income, from 2014 to 2018, was as
follows:
[6]              
His income for subsequent years will be
discussed below.
[7]              
The respondent testified that she frequently
requested updated income information from the applicant, but he never
complied.  His response, instead, was to complain that he was overpaying her as
it was.  She considered bringing variation proceedings from time to time, but
she was not “money driven” and was “naïve” in these matters.  She never made a
written request for financial disclosure, which would have triggered the
disclosure requirements in s. 25 of the Child Support Guidelines. 
However, the obligation to provide annual financial disclosure in s. 24.1 of
the Guidelines is automatic, and does not depend upon the written
request of the recipient.  The applicant clearly failed to comply with those provisions.
[8]              
On March 12, 2012, Alyssa gave birth to a child,
Faith, at the age of 16.  According to the Request to Admit, filed by the
applicant and deemed to have been admitted by the respondent, the applicant contacted
the Family Responsibility Office (“FRO”) to terminate the child support payable
for Alyssa.  The respondent refused to agree that support should be terminated,
because Alyssa was still under 18 despite having become a mother.  The
applicant did not bring a motion to change, nor did he otherwise press the
matter.
[9]              
When Alyssa reached the age of 18 in 2013, she
was no longer in full time attendance at school, to the knowledge of the
applicant.  She was, therefore, clearly disentitled to child support at that
point in time.  However, the applicant continued paying $808 per month, and took
no action to vary child support until he commenced this application in
September, 2022.  His payments continued until June 1, 2023, when the payment
of child support was terminated by the interim order of Grace J. dated June 8,
2023.
[10]          
I infer from all of this that he did not want to
bring an application to vary support to delete the support payable for Alyssa, because
he would need to file current income information in order to do so.  The December
12, 2005 order did not order support on a per child basis, where
Alyssa’s support could simply be deleted, but made one support order for all
three children.  Terminating support for Alyssa would require the court to
calculate the support payable for the remaining two children.  Based on the annual
income figures shown above, if support were to be recalculated he would have
found himself paying considerably more for two children than he had been paying
for three under the interim order.
[11]          
This inference is confirmed by the position he
has taken in his counsel’s closing submissions at this trial, where he
abandoned any claim to retroactive variation prior to November 1, 2019, and
agreed with the respondent that any variation would only be effective from that
date forward.  Mr. Potter vaguely stated that retroactively terminating
Alyssa’s support back to 2013 would create “conceptual difficulties”.  He did
not expand on what those difficulties might be, but I infer that they related
to the need to recalculate the support payable for the remaining children based
on his annual income from year to year since then.
[12]          
On October 16, 2019, tragedy struck.  Alyssa was
killed in a car accident.  Celisha and Breanna were both at school at York
University when they heard the news, as was the respondent, who was employed
there.  This was devasting for the family, as will be detailed below.  The
respondent took custody of Faith, and continues to act as mother to the child
to this day.  The applicant agreed that he would continue to pay child support,
notwithstanding Alyssa’s death, and that the support that would have gone to
Alyssa could be used to help raise Faith instead.
[13]          
Almost three years later, the applicant decided that
he was no longer prepared to pay support, and commenced this application on September
12, 2022, seeking termination of all of his support obligations, and
reimbursement of child support paid beyond their eligibility dates.
[14]          
In the respondent’s Answer dated November 25,
2022, she agreed that support for Alyssa should be terminated effective October
16, 2019, being the date of her death.  However, she made a claim of her own for
variation of the child support payable for Celisha and Breanna, “once the income
of the Applicant Father has been determined”, effective November 1, 2019 until
present.
[15]          
During her testimony, I asked her why she
expressly limited the date of retroactivity to November 1, 2019.  She was not sure
why, but assumed it had come up in her discussions with her lawyer, who had
been retained on a limited-scope retainer at that point in time, and was
assisting her in preparing her pleadings.  It is reasonable to assume that this
arose out of the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in D.B.S. v. S.R.G.,
2006 SCC 37, which established a presumptive cap on retroactivity at
three years prior to formal notice of the application to vary.
[16]          
At the Settlement Conference before Campbell J.
on March 7, 2024, the applicant requested, and received, leave to amend his Application,
and subsequently did so.  The respondent admits that, as confirmed in the Trial
Scheduling Endorsement Form, she was given the opportunity to amend her
pleadings in response, but did not do so.  This was well after the fall of 2022
when, she testified, “my jaw dropped when I realized just how much income he
had earned over the years without increasing his child support obligations”.
[17]          
She did not request leave to amend her pleadings
prior to, or at any time during the course of, this trial.  It was only in her
closing submissions, when she referred to the concept of “blameworthy conduct”,
that she asked the court to consider varying support back to a time earlier
than November 1, 2019.  I reminded her that her pleadings specifically limited
the date of retroactivity to the November date, and even at that late point in
time there was still no request for an amendment.  Had there been such a
request, though, such an amendment would have fundamentally altered the case
before the court, and would have required an entire body of evidence to be put
before the court that had not been tendered, given the state of the pleadings. 
Accordingly, I ruled that she was bound by the relief she had sought in her
Answer.
[18]          
There are two issues before the court.  The
first is a determination of the period or periods during which Celisha and
Breanna were entitled to support.  The second is a determination of the quantum
of support to be paid during those periods.
[19]          
Support entitlement is determined by s. 31(1) of
the Family Law Act, which provides as follows:
[20]          
The quantum of support is determined by s. 33(11)
of the Act, which provides as follows:
[21]          
I will make reference to specific sections of
the Guidelines as they become relevant in the discussion below.
[22]          
The applicant concedes that both Celisha and
Breanna were in full-time attendance at York University as of November 1, 2019,
and were, therefore, entitled to child support at the table amount based on the
applicant’s income.
[23]          
He concedes that Breanna continued to be
eligible until May, 2020, but at that point in time she ceased being a
full-time student.  She was over the age of 18, and never returned to school
thereafter, and thus it is argued that she was disentitled to child support
after May, 2020.
[24]          
As to Celisha, the applicant concedes that she
continued to be a full-time student at York throughout 2020, and finished her
degree in August, 2021.  He therefore submits that she was disentitled to
support after August, 2021.
[25]          
His final submissions can be summed up by the
following table, a version of which he filed with the court:
[26]          
According to the applicant’s calculations, the
total amount of child support actually paid by the applicant from November 1,
2019 until his last payment in 2023 was $31,512.  Accordingly,
the applicant claims from the respondent the difference in those two amounts,
representing reimbursement of the alleged overpayment in the amount of $14,744.
[27]          
The respondent disputes both the entitlement
termination dates that the applicant proposes, as well as the quantum of
support that should have been paid.
[28]          
With respect to Breanna, her original intention
had been to study at York and obtain a 4-year degree.  However, she was
severely impacted by the death of Alyssa.  Given that she learned the news
while at school, she came to associate being at school with her sister’s death,
and said “it was hard to enter the hallways without thinking of what
happened”.  She finished her first year, but never returned to school
thereafter.  She spent most of her time in her bedroom at her mother’s house,
alone, in a state of deep depression.  She lost weight, and went down to around
80 pounds by 2022.
[29]          
Her mother encouraged her to seek professional
help, but Breanna was stubborn and refused to get any, until sometime in 2022,
when she began seeing her current psychiatrist.  She is on medication which has
helped stabilize her mental health, and has helped her to get and keep the job
she now has, working in a daycare centre at the YMCA caring for infants from 4
months to 4 years old.
[30]          
The only medical report filed with respect to Breanna
is from her psychiatrist, Dr. Staab, dated May 5, 2023.  It is one paragraph
long.  It states that he saw Breanna in consultation on May 5, 2023.  She was
diagnosed with a “mood disorder”, and he had
recommended some medications to help with mood stabilization.  She will follow
up with him under his care over the next 6 months, for follow-up and treatment. 
She is currently living at home and requires the support and guidance of her
mother.
[31]          
There is no opinion offered as to the impact of
her mood disorder on her ability to work and to withdraw from the charge of her
mother.  It is clear that she did not, in fact, withdraw from her mother’s
charge.  The respondent continued to provide a home, meals and other
necessities of live for Breanna throughout, at considerable expense and
financial hardship, while Breanna contributed no income herself.  Indeed, money
was so tight that the respondent had to file a Consumer Proposal on November
11, 2022.  This requires her to make monthly payments of around $275 for five
years, in the total amount of $16,500.
[32]          
Breanna did try to set up a home-based business as
an eyelash technician.  She obtained a certification in 2021 and started to
practice then, but only had about 1 client per week, so it generated very
little income.  She obtained her current job in July, 2024, and has aspirations
to return to university at some point and get her degree.
[33]          
The respondent asks for Breanna’s child support
to continue until July, 2023.
[34]          
The onus is, of course, on the respondent to
prove that Breanna was unable, by reason of her illness, to withdraw from
parental charge:  Licata v. Shure, 2022 ONCA 270, at para. 33.  In Weber
v. Weber, 2020 ONSC 4098, at para. 63, Chappel J. spoke to the quality of
the proof required to satisfy that onus, stating that “the court will require
credible and trustworthy evidence” showing, among other things, that the child
is unable, due to their illness or disability, to obtain the necessaries of life,
and therefore looks to the parent for financial assistance.
[35]          
In Druhan v. Druhan, 2010 ONSC 3430,
Polowin J. relied on the New Brunswick Court of Appeal in setting the standard
for the proof required.  She said this, at para. 50:
[36]          
The respondent is required to prove two things
on this issue:  first, that Breanna was suffering from an illness or disability
at the relevant time, and second, that because of that illness or disability she
was unable to support herself and obtain the necessities of life, and was therefore
unable to withdraw from the care and support of her mother.  While Dr. Staab’s
letter does offer a diagnosis that she was suffering from a “mood disorder”
when he saw her in May of 2023, we have no medical opinion regarding her
condition from May of 2020 up until that date.  Furthermore, there is no expert
opinion offered that links her mood disorder to an inability to provide for
herself.
[37]          
Accordingly, I agree with the applicant that the
respondent has failed to discharge her onus of proof.  I conclude that
Breanna’s entitlement to child support ceased after May, 2020.
[38]          
As to Celisha, she graduated from York in
August, 2021.  Unlike Breanna, she has produced clinical records confirming
that she was seen by Dr. Freedman on a relatively continuous basis from 2015 up
to and including 2023.  Because of her issues, York provided her with
accommodation, such that she was permitted to obtain her degree over 6 years
instead of 4.  In August, 2019, Dr. Freedman referred her to a psychiatrist with
a diagnosis of “anxiety, neurosis, suicide, attempted”.  However, unlike
Breanna, there is not even a brief medical opinion to verify her diagnosis, nor
is there any evidence to link it to an inability to provide for her own needs.
[39]          
Furthermore, in her own evidence she
demonstrated that she was, in fact, able to work and earn an income.  She was
employed on a full-time basis from the time of her graduation in August, 2021
for almost two years, well into 2023.  She obtained another full-time job
shortly thereafter.  She was not working at the time she testified at trial,
because her last employment was seasonal, and she was laid off in January,
2025.
[40]          
She has recently returned to school, at George
Brown College, to study fashion design and techniques.  She started in January,
2024, and is expected to graduate in May or June, 2025.  She believes that her
studies at George Brown will be a good supplement to her fine arts degree in
facilitating a career in the fashion field.
[41]          
The respondent argues that Celisha’s recent return
to full-time studies at George Brown re-establishes her entitlement to child
support.  However, she is now 27 years of age.  This will be her second degree,
and while the courts in some cases have ordered child support to continue
during a second degree, many others have limited a child’s entitlement to
support to the first degree only.  While she continues to live at home, and
does represent something of a financial burden to the respondent, she has been
able to work full-time prior to starting her new program, and has held a
part-time job while she has been attending school.  Coupled with OSAP
assistance, I consider her to be largely self-supporting, and cannot be
considered as being unable to withdraw from her mother’s charge.
[42]          
Accordingly, I agree with the applicant that
Celisha’s entitlement to support ends after August, 2021.
[43]          
What remains is the determination of the quantum
of support to be paid by the applicant for Breanna and Celisha during the
periods of eligibility established above.  This will flow from a determination
of applicant’s income from 2019 to 2021.  The respondent took no position on
this point, and left it to the court to determine the applicant’s true income
for support purposes.
[44]          
The applicant operates a business under the name
of HIT Services Inc.  He did so for a number of years as a sole proprietor, but
incorporated the business in 2019.  He is the sole owner, director and
shareholder.  As soon as I saw the financial records of the corporation, I put
Mr. Potter on notice that attribution was going to be a significant factor in a
determination of the applicant’s income.  The income figures in the applicant’s
table, above, show only his income from the salary he paid himself from his
company, and do not reflect any retained earnings that he chose to leave in the
company.
[45]          
As shown in the applicant’s table, his T-4
income from the corporation in 2019 was $70,000.  However, the company had net
income for the year, after the payment of his salary and all expenses and
corporate taxes, of $8,479. The applicant admitted in his testimony that this
money was available to him, but he chose not to take it out of the corporation.
 The corporation’s pre-tax net income for that year was $9,690.
[46]          
In 2020, his salary was $58,000.  However, the
company earned net profit that year, after payment of that salary and all other
expenses and corporate taxes, of $221,260.  This money was left in the company,
as an accretion to retained earnings.  Once again, he admitted that this money
was available to him, but he left it in the business.  The pre-tax net income
of the company for that year was $252,249.
[47]          
In 2021, his employment income is stated to be
$77,000, as shown in the table above.  However, in the company’s Statement of
Income and Retained Earnings, it shows “salaries and wages” paid of $133,000. 
He testified that the only persons receiving a salary from the company were
himself and his wife.  Everyone else who worked for the company was a
subcontractor.  His wife worked part time, 3 days per week, taking care of
invoices.  He said her income was between $30,000 and $42,000 per year.  This
does not accord with what the company’s financial statement says, since the
combined salaries fall well short of $133,000.
[48]          
Be that as it may, the company earned net profit
that year, after expenses and corporate taxes, of $329,388.  Once again, he
admitted that this money was available to him, but was left in the company as
an accretion to retained earnings, which by that point in time stood at
$559,126.  The pre-tax net income of the company for that year was $347,023.
[49]          
Section 18 of the Guidelines provides as
follows:
[50]          
Given the applicant’s admission that he is the
sole owner, director and shareholder of the company, it was entirely within his
power to determine how much salary he would pay himself, and how much income he
would leave in the corporation.  This allowed him to engineer the income
actually paid out to him to an artificially low level.  I am satisfied that the
employment income figures used by the applicant in the table, above, do not
fairly reflect all of the money available to him to pay child support.  Given
his admission that these retained earnings were “available” to him, and were
left in the company by choice, I am of the view that it is appropriate to add
the pre-tax corporate income to the salary paid to the applicant, in order to determine
an amount that fairly reflects all of the money available to him from which to
pay child support.  I do not find it necessary or appropriate to add back the salary
paid to his wife, since I find it reasonable in the circumstances.
[51]          
Mr. Potter argued that it was reasonable for the
applicant to leave this money in the corporation, in order to provide working
capital.  That argument is often made in opposition to an attribution order.  However,
the applicant did not, in fact, do so.  In 2022, he paid himself a dividend
from the corporation of $322,000.  In 2023 he paid himself another dividend of
$102,034.  Both of these dividends came out of, and correspondingly reduced,
retained earnings.  He testified in his reply evidence that he used the first
dividend to purchase one house, and used the second to purchase another house. 
Clearly, if those retained earnings were available for him to enrich himself by
purchasing real estate, they were equally available for him to pay child
support, for the short duration that is at issue in these proceedings.
[52]          
Taking the applicant’s salary from the table,
above, and adjusting that income by adding the pre-tax net income of the
corporation in each year, and then calculating the table amount of child
support payable based upon that income, leads to the following result.  Note
that I have accepted his employment income for 2021 at $77,000, despite the
discrepancy discussed above:
[53]          
As noted above, the total amount of child
support actually paid by the applicant, from November 1, 2019 until his last
payment in 2023, was $31,512.  Crediting him with this amount as against
retroactive child support of $65,759 would leave him in arrears in the amount
of $34,247.
[54]          
There is another relevant section of the Guidelines
that must be considered before arriving at a final decision.  Section 4
provides as follows:
[55]          
In this case, with attributed income we are
dealing with income in excess of $150,000 for both 2020 and 2021.  Section 4
directs the court to calculate support based on the table amount, unless the
court considers that amount to be inappropriate, in which case it should follow
the approach set out in ss. (b).
[56]          
In Simon v. Simon, 1999 CanLII 3818 (ON CA), 1999 CarswellOnt 3863,
[1999] O.J. No. 4492 (C.A.) at para. 22, MacPherson J.A., speaking for the
court, cited Francis v. Baker, 1999 CanLII 659 (SCC), 1999 CarswellOnt 2734 (S.C.C.) as
standing for the proposition that, in considering s. 4 of the Guidelines,
“the burden is on the paying spouse to demonstrate that the Table amount is
inappropriate”.  See also Tauber v. Tauber, 2001 CanLII 28234 (ON SC), 2001 CarswellOnt 2842,
[2001] O.J. No. 3259 (S.C.J.), which listed a number of applicable principles at
para. 40, including that “there must be clear and compelling evidence for
departing from the Guidelines figure”.  The test for reasonable expenses
will be a demonstration by the paying parent that the budgeted expense is so
high "as to exceed the generous ambit within which reasonable disagreement
is possible": Bellenden v. Satterthwaire, [1948] 1 All E.R. 343
(Eng. C.A.) at 345.
[57]          
The applicant has marshalled no evidence that
would persuade me that the table amount is inappropriate.  The children were
clearly in great need during the period in question, and the respondent was
struggling financially to the point where she became overwhelmed with debt and
had to make a Consumer Proposal.  The applicant, meanwhile, had ample income
with which to pay the table amount.  Large though the monthly payments may be,
they still represent a relatively small fraction of his total available income.
[58]          
I also cannot ignore the fact that the applicant
has benefitted from underpaying child support, for at least the five years
immediately preceding 2019.  While I have denied the respondent’s request to
vary child support prior to November 1, 2019 because she had never asked for
such relief in her pleadings, the underpayment remains an obvious fact.  In
2018 alone, when he earned $147,141, and assuming that Alyssa was disentitled
at that point, support for the remaining two children should have been $2,044
per month, which is a far cry from $808.
[59]          
Furthermore, no order is being made over and
above table support for a contribution to the children’s s. 7 expenses.  Given
that both girls were attending York University, a s. 7 order would have
amounted to many thousands of dollars on its own.
[60]          
There is no question as to the respondent’s
entitlement to child support for the period in question, since I have accepted
all of the applicant’s submissions in that regard.  The only issue where I did
not accept his submissions related to the applicant’s income, and the amount of
support that was payable as a result.  Given the factors discussed above, I do
not consider it to be “inappropriate” to make the applicant pay the full table
amount that is presumptively applicable for that very short period.
[61]          
For all of these reasons, a final order will go
as follows:
[62]          
The final issue is costs.  While the respondent
was self-represented at trial, she did incur legal expenses during the course
of this litigation, as well as incurring expenses and, perhaps, lost income in the
course of conducting this trial.  I encourage the parties to agree on the issue
of costs.  If they cannot agree, and since the respondent is obviously the
successful party in this litigation, I will accept written submissions on costs
from the respondent within 20 days, with the applicant’s response due within 10
days thereafter, and any reply from the respondent due within 5 days
thereafter.  Submissions should be served on the opposing party, or their
counsel as the case may be, and filed with the court.
[63]          
The parties shall include in their written
submissions on costs their additional submissions as to the manner in which the
arrears shall be paid.  My preliminary view is that a clean break is
appropriate in this case, such that the applicant should arrange financing and
pay these arrears in a lump sum, within a reasonable time.  However, I will
consider the submissions of the parties before making a final decision.